It's hard to really get a sense of the CKY
algorithm from staring at pseudo code, but
I think if we work through an example,
it'll actually seem pretty natural and
straightforward.
So let's do that.
So starting off, here's the grammar
that we're going to use.
It's similar to the ones
that I've shown before,
when we did the grammar transformations.
It's a grammar with unaries but
with no empties in it.
Okay, so there's only one conceptual leap
that we have to make to get this to work.
And that is, before,
I showed you parse triangles,
the natural way that makes sense.
But, it turns out that it's really hard
to write text in diagonal diamonds.
And so, by and large, what everyone
has decided is that it's much,
much easier to get human beings to tilt
their necks 45 degrees to the right.
And so, they can see a parse triangle,
rather than to actually
print things that way.
So conceptually, you should think
about it just as we've had it before,
that this is fish, people,
fish, tanks.
And so, this is the first
diagonal of the single words.
This is the second diagonal
of the pairs of words.
The triples of words, and
the four word constituents.
Okay, so what do we need to get going?
We have our sentence to parse,
fish, people, fish, tanks.
The second thing that
we need is the grammar.
And so, then, once we've done
that we can start doing things.
So in particular, what we're going to do
is start filling in the lexical entries.
So, we start with the cell here and
we say,
okay the word fish,
that can be a noun or a verb.
And so, we put in that we can make
a noun from fish with probability 0.2.
And we can make a verb from
fish with probability 0.6.
And then, we keep on doing this for
the other cells along the diagonal.
So people can be a noun
with probability 0.5,
and people can be a verb
with probability 0.1.
And we keep on going.
And this is what we get.
Okay, but now, our grandma also has
unaries that rewrite to categories.
So, we also then,
have to apply the unary rules.
And so, the way we'll do that is, for
each cell we'll find
unary rules that apply,
and if they create a category that
isn't there before, or one with
higher probability than what was there
before, then we'll put it into our chart.
And in this case,
the relevant unary rules here,
we've got one other nary rule
over here actually, are all
creating different categories, so
we'll be adding new things to the chart.
So we'll say, look, we can also make a VP
here which has probability 0.06.
So there, I'm taking the 0.1 and
the 0.6 and multiplying it.
We can make an NP where the probability
of that is 0.7 times 0.2, 0.14.
And in the first round through,
that's all we'll do.
But after we've been through all
of the rules for non-terminals,
we then say well,
we have added some new things.
So added is true, and so,
we'll do this whole while loop once more.
And we need to do that, so
we also discover that we can apply
a second layer of unary roles and
build an S over this span.
So, we'll also build an S.
And the probability of
that will be 0.1 times
the probability of the VP,
so that'll be 0.006.
Okay, and so
then we're going to apply the unary
rules down the other cells of the lexicon.
So at this point, we're ready to start
doing the heart of the CYK algorithm,
which is building constituents
over bigger spans,
first applying binary rules and then we'll
do the unaries again on top of them.
Okay, so at this point, the cell that
we next want to fill is this one.
So, this is the cell that's covering
from words, positions, 0 to 2.
So, this version of the algorithm
I've written using fencepost,
even though the particular way I'm doing
it, there aren't any empty elements.
Okay, and so to build a binary
constituent out of this, the only way to
do it is to build it something from
0 to 1 and something from 1 to 2.
All the things from 0 to 1
are contained in this cell, and
the things from 1 to 2
are contained in this cell.
And so, what we're going to do is
consider ways of combining one of
each of those to make some other
constituent which will be licensed,
providing there's a rule
in the grammar over here,
of x goes to yz, where y is something
here and z is something there.
So, what of that sort can we do?
Well, there are no binary
rules that have an N
on the right-hand side, only unary rules.
So, we won't be able to
do anything with the N.
If we look at this V here,
that could be made with that that rule.
So, that's something that we can make.
So look, we've got a VP goes to VNP.
And so,
that means we can make a VP in this cell.
And the probability of
it will be 0.6 times
0.35 times the probability of this rule.
And at this point,
you're starting to stretch my
ability to do mental arithmetic.
So, that's 0.3 times 0.35.
So, that's 5 carry the 1, so 0.105.
But then, there are also other things
that we can build with binary rules.
So what other the binary rules do we have?
We've got a rule for
S goes to NP VP, and well,
we can certainly apply that
because we've got an NP here and
a VP there, and so
we can build an S over this span.
And similarly, for some other ones.
So, NP goes to NP NP,
where we've got an NP here and
an NP there, so
we can build NP over this span.
I won't try and work out all
the probabilities, but if we do that and
apply them, we then end up with
all of these probabilities here.
Now, it turns out that for
each of the constituents that we
built here in the binary phase.
There's only one way of making them so
there wasn't any contention.
But we'll be able to see contention
at the next unary phase.
And our rule for contention is always,
if we discover multiple ways to
make a category over a span,
we keep the one of highest probability.
And so the next phase here we now do is
we do unaries for these cells down here.
So again, we look for unary rules and
if they give a way of making
something with higher probability
we put that into the chart and
then we say we've done some work and
having done some work will lead us to do
the whole while loop again in case we're
able to build up chains of unary rules.
So in this particular case,
there are no unary
rules that have NP on the right hand side,
so we can't do anything there.
But there is a unary rule that has
VP on the right hand side, and so
we discover that there's another way
that we can make an S where we make
an S goes to VP.
And while the probability
of that is actually going
to be 0.105 times 0.1, which is 0.0105,
which is actually a lot more than
the probability of this role.
So we're going to record a better way
of making S in our back pointers,
and we're going to record the probability
of that new best way of making it.
We always just keep what constituents
we can make the best probability
way of making them, and
if we're store in that pointers, the way
that was the best way of making it.
So if we go through all the cells and
see if we can make them in better
ways with unary rules, we find that
that's possible in precisely two places.
This one and also over here we
find a better way of making an S.
And so we update those two and
this is now the second row.
Okay, so
now we're going to go onto the third row
where we're building
three word constituents.
So this is the fish people fish cell and
this is the people fish tank cell.
So at this point things get
a little bit more interesting for
building the binary constituents.
So when we're going to
build things in this cell
which are things from here to here.
Well, we're going to build
binary constituents but
there are two ways that we can do it.
We can either take something from here,
from zero to two and combined it
with something from two to three.
Or else we can take something
from zero to one and
combined it with something
from one to three.
And that's what we're doing in this part
of algorithm here, we choose a split
point, for
dividing the constituent into two.
This is where we exploited the only binary
rule to get the cubic kind algorithm.
So it iterates across split point
which is another O(n) operation and
then we consider what rules that
we can apply for each split point.
And then that part is as we did it before.
So first off we going to start with
saying okay we're going to combine
stuff from zero to two that's this
cell with something from two to three,
that's this cell.
And so then we'll see what we can build.
And while we have an NP and an NP and so
that will allow us to build
a bigger NP according to that rule.
And we have NP and
a VP so
that allows to build an S using this rule.
And we have,
well it seems like we can't actually build
a VP over that span doing things that way.
Okay let's then consider the other
possibility where we do this and this.
Well, this time we can
build an NP by combining
this NP, and then working with the other
one where we could get this cell.
So this time we're using these two cells.
So we can use this NP and this NP
which will allow us to build an NP.
We can use this verb and this NP,
which will allow us to build a VP, and
we can use this NP and
this VP which will allow us to build an S.
And so we can build things with that span.
And so then what we're going to
want to do is say, okay,
we can definitely build an NP over this
span, but we want to find out which
of these two is the highest probability on
of way of making NP and keep only that.
And similarly we're going to want
to find out which of these two
is the highest probability way of
making an S and keep only that.
Now actually if you work
through the math in this case
there's a little fine point for
the NP case.
Because if you look at the NP case for
the purple one,
it's 0.0049 times 0.14 and
the probability of the NP
rule is a constant 0.1.
And if you go to the green one,
it's 0.14 here,
which is the same as there and
0.0049, which is the same as there.
Reflecting the fact that
both ways of doing it,
you're using the word fish twice and
the word people once.
So actually both ways of making
NP have identical probability.
So in practice, when you have
ties like this, these parses,
just choose one analysis,
the first one they come across.
But sort of you can just say,
they choose one analysis randomly.
Okay so that then fills in that cell and
we get these numbers,
and then at that point,
we would again apply unary rules.
So the only unary rules that's
active at this level is this one.
because the other two unary
rules only work on N and V and
so aren't applicable in a cell like this,
in this little grammar.
So we'd also find a new way of making
an S by making it from a VP but
it's probability would be
0.1 times this number.
So it'd be 0.000147,
which is less than the way we've
already discovered of making an S so
we'll keep this as the highest
probability analysis.
Okay, so then we do the cell here,
the one, the four cell.
And so again, there are two split
points of ways of making it up.
We can either make something from
one to two and then three to four.
Or else we can make something
from one to three and
then from three to four,
and so we explore all those
ways of combining things,
and fill in this cell.
Okay, now we're almost at the end.
We just have to fill in
the final cell of the chart.
And it's the same thing apart
from now when we iterate
across split points there
are three ways to do it.
So you can make things to
put in here either by taking
things from zero to one
followed by two to four.
Or you can have things
that are from zero to two.
Plus things from 2 to 4.
Or you can have things that are from
0 to 3 plus things from 3 to 4.
And so we explore all the ways
of combining things, and again,
choose the highest probability way of
making each of a noun phrase, an S,
and a VP, which are the three constituent
types that we can build over that span.
Now, by the time we've gone this far up,
the method is much too difficult for
me to do in real time in front of you.
But I've worked it all out in advance and
if we fill it out, this is what we get.
So what we get here is
that we can't just ask
the question of what's the highest
probability parse of this sentence,
regardless of what category you choose for
it.
And the answer to that is that
is parsing it as a sentence.
But if you have a nominated
start category like S,
you can instead say, I just want to
find an analysis as an S, regardless.
And then that will also
return this analysis.
Okay, I say we're finished but actually,
well, where is the parse tree?
And so the answer to the parse tree
is we can find it by now calling this
build tree routine that traces
backwards through the tree.
And so we know that the first
thing that we built at the top,
just taking this starting point,
is it's an S goes to NP, VP.
And at this point, I have to confess
that I actually left a little bit out of
what's written in the table just
to keep things written larger.
But rather than simply writing
the rule that you used,
you'll actually record which
cells you built it from, so
that these are actually
constituents over spans.
So this is actually a noun phrase
that was built over 0 to 2,
followed by a verb phrase
that was built over 2 to 4.
Okay, so that means we now look in the 0
to 2 cell to find the noun phrase.
We look in the 2 to 4 cell
to find the verb phrase.
And at that point, we'll start to, so
this is 0 to 4, 0 to 2, 2 to 4, and
at this point we start
to recurse downwards.
So the highest probability way of
building a noun phrase was using
the noun phrase goes to noun
phrase noun phrase rule.
And since that's a binary rule,
we then necessarily know that
that had to be 0,1 and 1 to 2.
And the highest way of making a verb
phrase is using the verb noun phrase rule,
where this goes from 2 to 3,
and this goes from 3 to 4.
Okay, so then that means we're building
this noun phrase as a noun
phrase in this cell and
we're building this noun phrase
as a noun phrase in that cell.
And then over here,
we're building a verb as a verb in this
cell and we're building the noun
phrase as a noun phrase in this cell.
So at that point, we can then say well,
what's the highest way of
building a noun phrase here?
It's by making it as a noun from 0 to 1.
Well, what's the highest way
of making a noun over 0 to 1,
from the same span,
because that was the unary rule.
Well, it was by realizing it as the word
fish, which was a word in our sentence.
And now, similarly we do the same for
the other cells.
Okay, so from 1 to 2,
the way we're building a noun phrase
with highest probability was building
it from a noun as a unary rule and
the way of building a noun with
highest probability was using
the word people that's
a terminal in the sentence.
The highest probability way of building
a verb from 2 to 3 is directly
making it from the word fish,
which is a terminal in our sentence.
And then the highest probability
of way of making a noun phrase
over 3 to 4 is for making from
a noun from 3 to 4 by unary rule.
And the highest probability
way of making noun over 3 to
4 is making it using the word tanks,
which is a terminal.
So at this point, we've been able to
follow the back traces back out and
can show you this is the highest
probability parse for this sentence.
Phew, that was a bit go get through for
me as well as you.
But I hope you can see it's actually
fairly straightforward as an algorithm and
it's actually much easier for
computers to do it than it is for
human beings filling in
squares of a rectangle.